
So now we have seen some examples of methods
that you will learn in this course.
Let's go into a bit more detail about what you will actually
learn and how the course is structured.
So the course is divided into seven sections.
In this first section that you're watching right now,
we will give you a course introduction
and a primer in statistics.
We will use mathematical statistics extensively
throughout this course, and we, therefore, offer this refresher
in some of the more important concepts that you will need.
However, we hope that these concepts are not new to you.
The second section will focus on the specific statistical
framework that all our filters are based on,
and that is Bayesian statistics.
You will learn the basic concepts
of Bayesian statistics, which includes
the most important rule of them all, which is Bayes' rule.
You will also learn about the common building blocks
that makes up a Bayesian model and how
to make optimal decisions using this Bayesian framework.
When you've completed this section,
you will be able to explain the fundamental principles
in Bayesian estimation.
In the third section, we will introduce state space models
and show how we can design optimal filters based on these.
And after this section, you will understand
the fundamental assumptions that are made
and be able to derive expressions
for an optimal filter based on these assumptions.
Now it's finally time that we learn our first filter,
and that is the Kalman filter.
Some of you might have come across this filter before
in previous courses.
In this course, we will, however,
start from scratch with a focus that you
should be able to describe the essential properties
of the Kalman filter and be able to apply it
on linear state space models.
As we alluded in our example in the beginning,
our state space models consist of two basic models, one motion
model and one measurement model.
In this section, we will present the most commonly used motion
and measurement models for automotive applications
and show how we can derive time discrete motion
models from time continuous dynamic models.
After this section, you'll be able to summarize and compare
the most typical motion models in automotive systems
in order to know when to use them in practical problems.
You will also be able to describe and model commonly
used sensor measurements.
Now in section four, you learned about the Kalman filter,
which we can use if our state space models are linear.
If we have nonlinear models, however, we
need to do something else.
So in this section, we will look at an important family
of nonlinear filters, and that is
the nonlinear Gaussian filters.
Here, you will get to implement the key nonlinear
Gaussian filters, both the extended Kalman filter, as well
as the unscented Kalman filter.
You will also analyze how they behave in different scenarios.
Lastly, we will present the particle filters,
which is also a nonlinear filter but,
in contrast to all the previous methods,
the particle filter do not try to describe the results using
a Gaussian distribution, but rather
as a set of weighted particles as we saw in the self
localization problem.
You will get to implement also these filters
and try them out on illustrative examples.
After completing all these sections,
you will be able to solve a variety of important real world
filtering problems by employing and adapting the methods
that you have learned to a variety of applications.
So once again, welcome to this course.
I hope you will enjoy it.
